apps/web/src/content/docs/evaluators/composite.mdx, before:

---
title: Composite Evaluators
description: Combine multiple evaluators with aggregation strategies for multi-criteria evaluation.
sidebar:
  order: 4
---

Composite evaluators combine multiple evaluators and aggregate their results into a single score. This enables sophisticated evaluation patterns like safety gates, weighted scoring, and conflict resolution.

## Basic Structure

A composite evaluator wraps two or more sub-evaluators and an aggregator that determines the final score:

```yaml
assert:
  - name: my_composite
    type: composite
    evaluators:
      - name: evaluator_1
        type: llm_judge
        prompt: ./prompts/check1.md
      - name: evaluator_2
        type: code_judge
        script: uv run check2.py
    aggregator:
      type: weighted_average
      weights:
        evaluator_1: 0.6
        evaluator_2: 0.4
```

Each sub-evaluator runs independently, then the aggregator combines their results.

## Aggregator Types

### Weighted Average (Default)

Combines scores using a weighted arithmetic mean:

```yaml
aggregator:
  type: weighted_average
  weights:
    safety: 0.3      # 30% weight
    quality: 0.7     # 70% weight
```

If weights are omitted, all evaluators receive equal weight (1.0).

The score is calculated as:

```
final_score = sum(score_i * weight_i) / sum(weight_i)
```

### Code Judge Aggregator

Run a custom script to decide the final score based on all evaluator results:

```yaml
aggregator:
  type: code_judge
  path: node ./scripts/safety-gate.js
  cwd: ./evaluators  # optional working directory
```

The script receives the evaluator results on stdin and must print a result to stdout.

**Input (stdin):**
```json
{
  "results": {
    "safety": { "score": 0.9, "hits": ["..."], "misses": ["..."] },
    "quality": { "score": 0.85, "hits": ["..."], "misses": ["..."] }
  }
}
```

**Output (stdout):**
```json
{
  "score": 0.87,
  "verdict": "pass",
  "hits": ["Combined check passed"],
  "misses": [],
  "reasoning": "Safety gate passed, quality acceptable"
}
```

### LLM Judge Aggregator

Use an LLM to resolve conflicts or make nuanced decisions across evaluator results:

```yaml
aggregator:
  type: llm_judge
  prompt: ./prompts/conflict-resolution.md
```

Inside the prompt file, use the `{{EVALUATOR_RESULTS_JSON}}` variable to inject the JSON results from all child evaluators.

## Patterns

### Safety Gate

Block outputs that fail safety even if quality is high. A code judge aggregator can enforce hard gates:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: safety-gated-response
    criteria: Safe and accurate response

    input: Explain quantum computing

    assert:
      - name: safety_gate
        type: composite
        evaluators:
          - name: safety
            type: llm_judge
            prompt: ./prompts/safety-check.md
          - name: quality
            type: llm_judge
            prompt: ./prompts/quality-check.md
        aggregator:
          type: code_judge
          path: ./scripts/safety-gate.js
```

The `safety-gate.js` script can return a score of 0.0 whenever the safety evaluator fails, regardless of the quality score.

### Multi-Criteria Weighted

Assign different importance to each evaluation dimension:

```yaml
- name: release_readiness
  type: composite
  evaluators:
    - name: correctness
      type: llm_judge
      prompt: ./prompts/correctness.md
    - name: style
      type: code_judge
      script: uv run style_checker.py
    - name: security
      type: llm_judge
      prompt: ./prompts/security.md
  aggregator:
    type: weighted_average
    weights:
      correctness: 0.5
      style: 0.2
      security: 0.3
```

### Nested Composites

Composites can contain other composites for hierarchical evaluation:

```yaml
- name: comprehensive_eval
  type: composite
  evaluators:
    - name: content_quality
      type: composite
      evaluators:
        - name: accuracy
          type: llm_judge
          prompt: ./prompts/accuracy.md
        - name: clarity
          type: llm_judge
          prompt: ./prompts/clarity.md
      aggregator:
        type: weighted_average
        weights:
          accuracy: 0.6
          clarity: 0.4
    - name: safety
      type: llm_judge
      prompt: ./prompts/safety.md
  aggregator:
    type: weighted_average
    weights:
      content_quality: 0.7
      safety: 0.3
```

## Result Structure

Composite evaluators return nested `scores`, giving full visibility into each sub-evaluator:

```json
{
  "score": 0.85,
  "verdict": "pass",
  "hits": ["[safety] No harmful content", "[quality] Clear explanation"],
  "misses": ["[quality] Could use more examples"],
  "reasoning": "safety: Passed all checks; quality: Good but could improve",
  "scores": [
    {
      "name": "safety",
      "type": "llm_judge",
      "score": 0.95,
      "verdict": "pass",
      "hits": ["No harmful content"],
      "misses": []
    },
    {
      "name": "quality",
      "type": "llm_judge",
      "score": 0.8,
      "verdict": "pass",
      "hits": ["Clear explanation"],
      "misses": ["Could use more examples"]
    }
  ]
}
```

Hits and misses from sub-evaluators are prefixed with the evaluator name (e.g., `[safety]`) in the top-level arrays.

## Best Practices

1. **Name evaluators clearly** -- names appear in results and debugging output, so use descriptive labels like `safety` or `correctness` rather than `eval_1`.
2. **Use safety gates for critical checks** -- do not let high quality scores override safety failures. A code judge aggregator can enforce hard gates.
3. **Balance weights thoughtfully** -- consider which aspects matter most for your use case and assign weights accordingly.
4. **Keep nesting shallow** -- deep nesting makes debugging harder. Two levels of composites is usually sufficient.
5. **Test aggregators independently** -- verify custom aggregation logic with unit tests before wiring it into a composite evaluator.

Commit message:

fix(docs): clarify composite assert syntax and scoring

apps/web/src/content/docs/evaluators/composite.mdx, after:

---
title: Composite Evaluators
description: Combine multiple evaluators with aggregation strategies for multi-criteria evaluation.
sidebar:
  order: 4
---

Composite evaluators combine multiple evaluators and aggregate their results into a single score. This enables sophisticated evaluation patterns like safety gates, weighted scoring, and conflict resolution.

## Basic Structure

A composite evaluator wraps two or more sub-evaluators and an aggregator that determines the final score:

```yaml
assert:
  - name: my_composite
    type: composite
    assert:
      - name: evaluator_1
        type: llm_judge
        prompt: ./prompts/check1.md
      - name: evaluator_2
        type: code_judge
        script: uv run check2.py
    aggregator:
      type: weighted_average
      weights:
        evaluator_1: 0.6
        evaluator_2: 0.4
```

Each sub-evaluator runs independently, then the aggregator combines their results.
Use `assert` for composite members. `evaluators` is still accepted for backward compatibility.

If you only need weighted-average aggregation, a plain test-level `assert` list already computes a weighted mean across evaluators. Use `composite` when you need a custom aggregation strategy (`threshold`, `code_judge`, `llm_judge`) or nested evaluator groups.

## Aggregator Types

### Weighted Average (Default)

Combines scores using a weighted arithmetic mean:

```yaml
aggregator:
  type: weighted_average
  weights:
    safety: 0.3      # 30% weight
    quality: 0.7     # 70% weight
```

If weights are omitted, all evaluators receive equal weight (1.0).
This is equivalent to averaging all member scores.

The score is calculated as:

```
final_score = sum(score_i * weight_i) / sum(weight_i)
```

### Code Judge Aggregator

Run a custom script to decide the final score based on all evaluator results:

```yaml
aggregator:
  type: code_judge
  path: node ./scripts/safety-gate.js
  cwd: ./evaluators  # optional working directory
```

The script receives the evaluator results on stdin and must print a result to stdout.

**Input (stdin):**
```json
{
  "results": {
    "safety": { "score": 0.9, "hits": ["..."], "misses": ["..."] },
    "quality": { "score": 0.85, "hits": ["..."], "misses": ["..."] }
  }
}
```

**Output (stdout):**
```json
{
  "score": 0.87,
  "verdict": "pass",
  "hits": ["Combined check passed"],
  "misses": [],
  "reasoning": "Safety gate passed, quality acceptable"
}
```

### LLM Judge Aggregator

Use an LLM to resolve conflicts or make nuanced decisions across evaluator results:

```yaml
aggregator:
  type: llm_judge
  prompt: ./prompts/conflict-resolution.md
```

Inside the prompt file, use the `{{EVALUATOR_RESULTS_JSON}}` variable to inject the JSON results from all child evaluators.

## Patterns

### Safety Gate

Block outputs that fail safety even if quality is high. A code judge aggregator can enforce hard gates:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: safety-gated-response
    criteria: Safe and accurate response

    input: Explain quantum computing

    assert:
      - name: safety_gate
        type: composite
        assert:
          - name: safety
            type: llm_judge
            prompt: ./prompts/safety-check.md
          - name: quality
            type: llm_judge
            prompt: ./prompts/quality-check.md
        aggregator:
          type: code_judge
          path: ./scripts/safety-gate.js
```

The `safety-gate.js` script can return a score of 0.0 whenever the safety evaluator fails, regardless of the quality score.

### Multi-Criteria Weighted

Assign different importance to each evaluation dimension:

```yaml
- name: release_readiness
  type: composite
  assert:
    - name: correctness
      type: llm_judge
      prompt: ./prompts/correctness.md
    - name: style
      type: code_judge
      script: uv run style_checker.py
    - name: security
      type: llm_judge
      prompt: ./prompts/security.md
  aggregator:
    type: weighted_average
    weights:
      correctness: 0.5
      style: 0.2
      security: 0.3
```

### Nested Composites

Composites can contain other composites for hierarchical evaluation:

```yaml
- name: comprehensive_eval
  type: composite
  assert:
    - name: content_quality
      type: composite
      assert:
        - name: accuracy
          type: llm_judge
          prompt: ./prompts/accuracy.md
        - name: clarity
          type: llm_judge
          prompt: ./prompts/clarity.md
      aggregator:
        type: weighted_average
        weights:
          accuracy: 0.6
          clarity: 0.4
    - name: safety
      type: llm_judge
      prompt: ./prompts/safety.md
  aggregator:
    type: weighted_average
    weights:
      content_quality: 0.7
      safety: 0.3
```

## Result Structure

Composite evaluators return nested `scores`, giving full visibility into each sub-evaluator:

```json
{
  "score": 0.85,
  "verdict": "pass",
  "hits": ["[safety] No harmful content", "[quality] Clear explanation"],
  "misses": ["[quality] Could use more examples"],
  "reasoning": "safety: Passed all checks; quality: Good but could improve",
  "scores": [
    {
      "name": "safety",
      "type": "llm_judge",
      "score": 0.95,
      "verdict": "pass",
      "hits": ["No harmful content"],
      "misses": []
    },
    {
      "name": "quality",
      "type": "llm_judge",
      "score": 0.8,
      "verdict": "pass",
      "hits": ["Clear explanation"],
      "misses": ["Could use more examples"]
    }
  ]
}
```

Hits and misses from sub-evaluators are prefixed with the evaluator name (e.g., `[safety]`) in the top-level arrays.

## Best Practices

1. **Name evaluators clearly** -- names appear in results and debugging output, so use descriptive labels like `safety` or `correctness` rather than `eval_1`.
2. **Use safety gates for critical checks** -- do not let high quality scores override safety failures. A code judge aggregator can enforce hard gates.
3. **Balance weights thoughtfully** -- consider which aspects matter most for your use case and assign weights accordingly.
4. **Keep nesting shallow** -- deep nesting makes debugging harder. Two levels of composites is usually sufficient.
5. **Test aggregators independently** -- verify custom aggregation logic with unit tests before wiring it into a composite evaluator.
