apps/web/src/content/docs/evaluators/custom-evaluators.mdx, before:

---
title: Custom Evaluators
description: Patterns for building custom evaluation logic
sidebar:
  order: 3
---

AgentV supports multiple evaluator types that can be combined for comprehensive evaluation.

## Evaluator Types

| Type | Description | Use Case |
|------|-------------|----------|
| `code_judge` | Deterministic script (Python/TS/any) | Exact matching, format validation, programmatic checks |
| `llm_judge` | LLM-based evaluation with custom prompt | Semantic evaluation, nuance, subjective quality |
| `rubrics` | Structured rubric evaluator via `assert` | Multi-criterion grading with weights |

## Referencing Evaluators

Evaluators are configured using `assert` — either top-level (applies to all tests) or per-test:

### Top-Level (Default for All Tests)

```yaml
description: My evaluation
assert:
  - name: correctness
    type: llm_judge
    prompt: ./judges/correctness.md

tests:
  - id: test-1
    # Uses the top-level evaluator
    ...
```

### Per-Case Override

```yaml
tests:
  - id: test-1
    criteria: Returns valid JSON
    input: Generate a JSON config
    assert:
      - name: json_check
        type: code_judge
        script: ./validators/check_json.py
```

## Combining Evaluators

Use multiple evaluators on the same case for comprehensive scoring:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: code-generation
    criteria: Generates correct Python code
    input: Write a sorting function
    assert:
      - type: rubrics
        criteria:
          - Code is syntactically valid
          - Handles edge cases (empty list, single element)
          - Uses appropriate algorithm
      - name: syntax_check
        type: code_judge
        script: ./validators/check_syntax.py
      - name: quality_review
        type: llm_judge
        prompt: ./judges/code_quality.md
```

Each evaluator produces its own score. Results appear in `scores[]` in the output JSONL.

## Best Practices

- **Use code judges for deterministic checks** — exact value matching, format validation, schema compliance
- **Use LLM judges for semantic evaluation** — meaning, quality, helpfulness
- **Use rubrics for structured multi-criteria grading** — when you need weighted, itemized scoring
- **Combine evaluator types** for comprehensive coverage
- **Test code judges locally** before running full evaluations

Commit message:

fix(docs): clarify composite assert syntax and scoring

apps/web/src/content/docs/evaluators/custom-evaluators.mdx, after:

---
title: Custom Evaluators
description: Patterns for building custom evaluation logic
sidebar:
  order: 3
---

AgentV supports multiple evaluator types that can be combined for comprehensive evaluation.

## Evaluator Types

| Type | Description | Use Case |
|------|-------------|----------|
| `code_judge` | Deterministic script (Python/TS/any) | Exact matching, format validation, programmatic checks |
| `llm_judge` | LLM-based evaluation with custom prompt | Semantic evaluation, nuance, subjective quality |
| `rubrics` | Structured rubric evaluator via `assert` | Multi-criterion grading with weights |

## Referencing Evaluators

Evaluators are configured using `assert` — either top-level (applies to all tests) or per-test:

### Top-Level (Default for All Tests)

```yaml
description: My evaluation
assert:
  - name: correctness
    type: llm_judge
    prompt: ./judges/correctness.md

tests:
  - id: test-1
    # Uses the top-level evaluator
    ...
```

### Per-Case Override

```yaml
tests:
  - id: test-1
    criteria: Returns valid JSON
    input: Generate a JSON config
    assert:
      - name: json_check
        type: code_judge
        script: ./validators/check_json.py
```

## Combining Evaluators

Use multiple evaluators on the same case for comprehensive scoring:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: code-generation
    criteria: Generates correct Python code
    input: Write a sorting function
    assert:
      - type: rubrics
        criteria:
          - Code is syntactically valid
          - Handles edge cases (empty list, single element)
          - Uses appropriate algorithm
      - name: syntax_check
        type: code_judge
        script: ./validators/check_syntax.py
      - name: quality_review
        type: llm_judge
        prompt: ./judges/code_quality.md
```

Each evaluator produces its own score. Results appear in `scores[]` in the output JSONL.

For multiple evaluators in `assert`, the test score is the weighted mean:

```
final_score = sum(score_i * weight_i) / sum(weight_i)
```

If `weight` is omitted, it defaults to `1.0` (equal weighting).
If any evaluator has `required: true` (or `required: <threshold>`) and scores below its required threshold, the overall test score is forced to `0`.

## Best Practices

- **Use code judges for deterministic checks** — exact value matching, format validation, schema compliance
- **Use LLM judges for semantic evaluation** — meaning, quality, helpfulness
- **Use rubrics for structured multi-criteria grading** — when you need weighted, itemized scoring
- **Combine evaluator types** for comprehensive coverage
- **Test code judges locally** before running full evaluations
