examples/features/document-extraction/README.md, before:

# Structured Data Evaluation Examples

This directory contains evaluation examples demonstrating AgentV's proposed structured data evaluators for document extraction and data quality assessment.

> **Note**: These examples use the `field_accuracy` evaluator implemented in OpenSpec proposal [`add-structured-data-evaluators`](../../../openspec/changes/add-structured-data-evaluators/).

> **Note on Geometric Evaluators**: IoU (bounding box) and coordinate distance evaluators are implemented as `code_judge` plugins rather than built-ins. See the [geometric evaluators spec](../../../openspec/changes/add-structured-data-evaluators/specs/geometric-evaluators/spec.md) for ready-to-use Python scripts.

## Invoice Extraction Example

**Use Case:** Commercial invoice extractor that parses structured trade data from shipping documents.

**Architecture:**
- **Input**: JSON mock files in `fixtures/` (simulating extracted invoice data)
- **Extractor**: `mock_extractor.ts` - Simple script that reads JSON and outputs it
- **Evaluator**: `field_accuracy` - Validates extracted fields against expected values
- **Test Cases**: 5 scenarios covering perfect extraction, fuzzy matching, tolerance, missing fields, and arrays

**AgentV Goals Alignment:**
- ✅ **Declarative Definitions**: YAML-based configuration with clear expected outcomes
- ✅ **Structured Evaluation**: Demonstrates deterministic field comparison (primitive for rubric-based patterns)
- ⚠️ **Multi-Objective Scoring**: Currently demonstrates correctness only; includes placeholders for latency/cost/safety
- ✅ **Optimization Ready**: Weighted fields enable future hyperparameter tuning of extraction algorithms

**Evaluators Used:**
- `field_accuracy` - Validates extracted fields against ground truth
  - Exact matching for invoice numbers and currency codes
  - Date matching with format normalization (handles "15-JAN-2025" vs "2025-01-15")
  - Numeric tolerance for amounts (±$1 to handle rounding)
  - Fuzzy matching for company names (handles spacing like "Acme - Shipping" vs "Acme Shipping")
  - Nested field paths for line item arrays

**Test Scenarios:**

1. **invoice-001**: Perfect extraction - Extractor normalizes data to match expected (rounds decimals, cleans spacing)
2. **invoice-002**: **Fuzzy matching test** - Extractor outputs "Acme - Shipping" (with hyphen/spaces), expected is "Acme Shipping". Tests Levenshtein similarity > 0.85
3. **invoice-003**: **Numeric tolerance test** - Extractor outputs 1889.5, expected is 1889. Tests ±$1 tolerance accepts 0.5 difference
4. **invoice-004**: **Missing required field** - Extractor fails to find invoice_number (absent in HTML), tests required field scoring penalty
5. **invoice-005**: Array validation - First 2 line items with path `line_items[0].description`

**How the Mock Extractor Works:**
The `mock_extractor.ts` simply reads JSON fixtures to test the evaluator. The fixtures contain intentional variations:
- **invoice-001**: Perfect extraction (baseline)
- **invoice-002**: Preserves "Acme - Shipping" (with hyphen) to test fuzzy matching
- **invoice-003**: Keeps decimal 1889.5 (vs expected 1889) to test numeric tolerance
- **invoice-004**: Missing invoice_number field to test required field penalty

**Directory Structure:**
```
invoice-extraction/
├── package.json               # No dependencies needed!
├── mock_extractor.ts          # Simple JSON reader (27 lines)
├── README.md                  # This file
├── evals/
│   └── dataset.yaml           # Evaluation dataset with 5 test cases
└── fixtures/                  # Test JSON data
    ├── invoice-001.json       # Complete invoice (8 line items)
    ├── invoice-002.json       # Supplier name spacing test
    ├── invoice-003.json       # Rounding tolerance test
    ├── invoice-004.json       # Missing required fields
    ├── invoice-005.json       # Partial extraction (2 line items)
    └── README.md
```

## Getting Started

**No installation needed!** The example uses only built-in Node.js APIs.

**Running the Example:**
```bash
# Run evaluations (when field_accuracy is implemented)
cd examples/features/invoice-extraction
agentv eval evals/dataset.yaml

# Manual test of extractor
bun run extract ../fixtures/invoice-001.json
```

## Running Evaluations

**Expected Output:**
```json
{
  "evalCaseResults": [
    {
      "id": "invoice-001",
      "score": 1.0,
      "verdict": "pass",
      "evaluatorResults": [
        {
          "name": "invoice_field_accuracy",
          "type": "field_accuracy",
          "score": 1.0,
          "hits": [
            "invoice_number",
            "invoice_date",
            "supplier.name",
            "net_total"
          ],
          "misses": []
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## Field Accuracy Evaluator Configuration

### Match Types

**Exact Match** - Strict equality
```yaml
- path: invoice.invoice_number
  match: exact
  required: true
  weight: 1.0
```

**Date Match** - Format-normalized date comparison
```yaml
- path: invoice.invoice_date
  match: date
  formats: ["DD-MMM-YYYY", "YYYY-MM-DD", "MM/DD/YYYY"]
  required: true
  weight: 1.0
```

Supported format tokens:
- `YYYY` - 4-digit year
- `MM` - 2-digit month (01-12)
- `DD` - 2-digit day (01-31)
- `MMM` - 3-letter month abbreviation (JAN, FEB, etc.)

**Numeric Tolerance** - Allow rounding errors
```yaml
- path: invoice.total
  match: numeric_tolerance
  tolerance: 0.01  # ±$0.01
  relative: false  # Absolute tolerance
  required: true
  weight: 3.0
```

**Fuzzy Match** - Handle OCR/spacing variations
```yaml
- path: invoice.issuer.name
  match: fuzzy
  algorithm: levenshtein  # or jaro_winkler
  threshold: 0.85  # 0.0-1.0 similarity score
  required: true
  weight: 0.8
```

### Aggregation Strategies

**Weighted Average** (default) - Each field contributes proportionally
```yaml
aggregation: weighted_average
# Final score = sum(field_score * weight) / sum(weights)
```

**All or Nothing** - Any failure causes overall failure
```yaml
aggregation: all_or_nothing
# Final score = 1.0 if all fields match, else 0.0
```

## Sample Data Structure

The expected invoice extraction output follows this schema (based on mock extractor output):

```typescript
interface InvoiceExtraction {
  invoice_number: string;
  invoice_date: string;
  incoterm: string | null;
  currency: string;
  net_total: number;
  gross_total: number;
  
  supplier: {
    name: string;
    address: string;
  };
  
  importer: {
    name: string;
    address: string;
  };
  
  line_items: Array<{
    description: string;
    product_code: string | null;
    quantity: number;
    unit_price: number;
    line_total: number;
    unit_type: string;
    hs_code: string;
  }>;
}
```

**Example output from mock extractor:**
```json
{
  "invoice_number": "INV-2025-001234",
  "invoice_date": "15-JAN-2025",
  "currency": "USD",
  "net_total": 1889,
  "gross_total": 1889,
  "supplier": {
    "name": "Acme - Shipping"
  },
  "importer": {
    "name": "Global Trade Co"
  },
  "line_items": [
    {
      "description": "OCEAN FREIGHT",
      "quantity": 1,
      "unit_price": 1370,
      "line_total": 1370,
      "hs_code": "853720"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Creating Your Own Eval

1. **Define ground truth** - Create expected output JSON structure
2. **Configure evaluator** - Choose match types and weights for each field
3. **Set thresholds** - Adjust tolerance/similarity based on requirements
4. **Add test cases** - Include success, partial, and failure scenarios
5. **Run and iterate** - Adjust weights/thresholds based on results

### Example: Custom Document Type

```yaml
$schema: agentv-eval-v2
description: Receipt data extraction

execution:total
          match: numeric_tolerance
          tolerance: 0.01
          weight: 3.0
        - path: merchant
          match: fuzzy
          threshold: 0.80
          weight: 1.0
        - path: date
          match: exact
          weight: 1.0

evalcases:
  - id: receipt-001
    expected_messages:
      - role: assistant
        content:
          merchant: "Acme Store"
          date: "2026-01-02"
          total: 42.99
    input_messages:
      - role: user
        content:
          - type: file
            value: ./fixtures/receipt-001.pdf
          - type: text
            value: "Extract structured data from this receipt"
```

## Best Practices

### Field Accuracy Configuration
1. **Weight critical fields higher** - Total amounts, IDs, dates should have weight >1.0
2. **Use fuzzy matching for text** - Names, addresses often have OCR variations
3. **Set realistic tolerances** - Base on observed accuracy (e.g., ±$1 for invoice totals)
4. **Mark optional fields** - `required: false` for non-critical data
5. **Test edge cases** - Include corrupted, partial, and malformed documents
6. **Start strict, relax gradually** - Begin with exact matching, add tolerance as needed

### Multi-Objective Evaluation
While the example focuses on correctness, AgentV's goals include multi-objective scoring:
- **Correctness**: Field accuracy, rubric satisfaction
- **Latency**: Extraction time per document (planned)
- **Cost**: Token usage, API costs (planned)
- **Safety**: PII handling, data sanitization (planned)

Use weighted aggregation across objectives for holistic evaluation.

### Choosing Evaluator Types
- **`field_accuracy`** (proposed): Best for structured extraction with known schema
- **`rubric`** (available now): Best for qualitative assessment with human-readable criteria
- **`code_judge`** (available now): Best for complex validation logic or custom metrics
- **Combine multiple**: Use `field_accuracy` for structure + `rubric` for quality

## Performance Benchmarks

Field accuracy evaluation targets:
- **Per-field comparison**: <10ms
- **100 fields**: ~1 second total
- **Typical invoice (20 fields)**: ~200ms

## Troubleshooting

**Low scores despite correct extraction:**
- Check field path syntax (use dot notation: `invoice.vendor.name`)
- Verify data types match (string "100" ≠ number 100)
- Review fuzzy threshold (0.85 may be too strict)

**All fields score 0.0:**
- Confirm candidate output structure matches expected schema
- Check for null/undefined values in extracted data
- Verify evaluator type is `field_accuracy` (not `llm_judge`)

**Numeric tolerance not working:**
- Ensure `relative: false` for absolute tolerance
- Check tolerance value (0.01 = ±1 cent, not ±1%)
- Verify both values are numbers (not strings)

## Related Examples

- [Geometric Evaluators (code_judge)](../../../openspec/changes/add-structured-data-evaluators/specs/geometric-evaluators/spec.md) - IoU and coordinate distance as Python scripts
- `../showcase/export-screening/` - Complex multi-evaluator example
- `../showcase/psychotherapy/` - Multi-turn conversation evaluation

Commit message:

refactor: Remove fuzzy matching from core, provide as code_judge example
Align with lightweight core principle by moving fuzzy string matching
(Levenshtein, Jaro-Winkler) out of built-in field_accuracy evaluator.

Changes:
- Remove 'fuzzy' match type from FieldMatchType
- Remove ~100 LOC of algorithm implementations from evaluators.ts
- Add fuzzy_match.ts code_judge example with both algorithms
- Add early warning for empty fields array in parser
- Document date format disambiguation behavior (defaults to US)
- Update changeset and README documentation

This is consistent with how IoU/geometric evaluators are handled -
complex algorithms belong in plugins, not core.

examples/features/document-extraction/README.md, after:

# Structured Data Evaluation Examples

This directory contains evaluation examples demonstrating AgentV's proposed structured data evaluators for document extraction and data quality assessment.

> **Note**: These examples use the `field_accuracy` evaluator implemented in OpenSpec proposal [`add-structured-data-evaluators`](../../../openspec/changes/add-structured-data-evaluators/).

> **Note on Geometric Evaluators**: IoU (bounding box) and coordinate distance evaluators are implemented as `code_judge` plugins rather than built-ins. See the [geometric evaluators spec](../../../openspec/changes/add-structured-data-evaluators/specs/geometric-evaluators/spec.md) for ready-to-use Python scripts.

> **Note on Fuzzy Matching**: Fuzzy string matching (Levenshtein, Jaro-Winkler) is implemented as a `code_judge` plugin. See [`fuzzy_match.ts`](./fuzzy_match.ts) for a ready-to-use TypeScript implementation.

## Invoice Extraction Example

**Use Case:** Commercial invoice extractor that parses structured trade data from shipping documents.

**Architecture:**
- **Input**: JSON mock files in `fixtures/` (simulating extracted invoice data)
- **Extractor**: `mock_extractor.ts` - Simple script that reads JSON and outputs it
- **Evaluator**: `field_accuracy` - Validates extracted fields against expected values
- **Test Cases**: 5 scenarios covering perfect extraction, fuzzy matching, tolerance, missing fields, and arrays

**AgentV Goals Alignment:**
- ✅ **Declarative Definitions**: YAML-based configuration with clear expected outcomes
- ✅ **Structured Evaluation**: Demonstrates deterministic field comparison (primitive for rubric-based patterns)
- ⚠️ **Multi-Objective Scoring**: Currently demonstrates correctness only; includes placeholders for latency/cost/safety
- ✅ **Optimization Ready**: Weighted fields enable future hyperparameter tuning of extraction algorithms

**Evaluators Used:**
- `field_accuracy` - Validates extracted fields against ground truth
  - Exact matching for invoice numbers and currency codes
  - Date matching with format normalization (handles "15-JAN-2025" vs "2025-01-15")
  - Numeric tolerance for amounts (±$1 to handle rounding)
  - Nested field paths for line item arrays
- `code_judge` with `fuzzy_match.ts` - For company names with OCR variations (Levenshtein similarity)

**Test Scenarios:**

1. **invoice-001**: Perfect extraction - Extractor normalizes data to match expected (rounds decimals, cleans spacing)
2. **invoice-002**: **Fuzzy matching test** - Extractor outputs "Acme - Shipping", expected is "Acme Shipping". Use `fuzzy_match.ts` code_judge for Levenshtein similarity
3. **invoice-003**: **Numeric tolerance test** - Extractor outputs 1889.5, expected is 1889. Tests ±$1 tolerance accepts 0.5 difference
4. **invoice-004**: **Missing required field** - Extractor fails to find invoice_number (absent in HTML), tests required field scoring penalty
5. **invoice-005**: Array validation - First 2 line items with path `line_items[0].description`

**How the Mock Extractor Works:**
The `mock_extractor.ts` simply reads JSON fixtures to test the evaluator. The fixtures contain intentional variations:
- **invoice-001**: Perfect extraction (baseline)
- **invoice-002**: Preserves "Acme - Shipping" (with hyphen) to test fuzzy matching
- **invoice-003**: Keeps decimal 1889.5 (vs expected 1889) to test numeric tolerance
- **invoice-004**: Missing invoice_number field to test required field penalty

**Directory Structure:**
```
invoice-extraction/
├── package.json               # No dependencies needed!
├── mock_extractor.ts          # Simple JSON reader (27 lines)
├── README.md                  # This file
├── evals/
│   └── dataset.yaml           # Evaluation dataset with 5 test cases
└── fixtures/                  # Test JSON data
    ├── invoice-001.json       # Complete invoice (8 line items)
    ├── invoice-002.json       # Supplier name spacing test
    ├── invoice-003.json       # Rounding tolerance test
    ├── invoice-004.json       # Missing required fields
    ├── invoice-005.json       # Partial extraction (2 line items)
    └── README.md
```

## Getting Started

**No installation needed!** The example uses only built-in Node.js APIs.

**Running the Example:**
```bash
# Run evaluations (when field_accuracy is implemented)
cd examples/features/invoice-extraction
agentv eval evals/dataset.yaml

# Manual test of extractor
bun run extract ../fixtures/invoice-001.json
```

## Running Evaluations

**Expected Output:**
```json
{
  "evalCaseResults": [
    {
      "id": "invoice-001",
      "score": 1.0,
      "verdict": "pass",
      "evaluatorResults": [
        {
          "name": "invoice_field_accuracy",
          "type": "field_accuracy",
          "score": 1.0,
          "hits": [
            "invoice_number",
            "invoice_date",
            "supplier.name",
            "net_total"
          ],
          "misses": []
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

## Field Accuracy Evaluator Configuration

### Match Types

**Exact Match** - Strict equality
```yaml
- path: invoice.invoice_number
  match: exact
  required: true
  weight: 1.0
```

**Date Match** - Format-normalized date comparison
```yaml
- path: invoice.invoice_date
  match: date
  formats: ["DD-MMM-YYYY", "YYYY-MM-DD", "MM/DD/YYYY"]
  required: true
  weight: 1.0
```

Supported format tokens:
- `YYYY` - 4-digit year
- `MM` - 2-digit month (01-12)
- `DD` - 2-digit day (01-31)
- `MMM` - 3-letter month abbreviation (JAN, FEB, etc.)

**Numeric Tolerance** - Allow rounding errors
```yaml
- path: invoice.total
  match: numeric_tolerance
  tolerance: 0.01  # ±$0.01
  relative: false  # Absolute tolerance
  required: true
  weight: 3.0
```

**Fuzzy Match** - Handle OCR/spacing variations (via code_judge)

For fuzzy string matching, use the provided `fuzzy_match.ts` script:
```yaml
evaluators:
  - name: vendor_name_fuzzy
    type: code_judge
    script: ./fuzzy_match.ts
```

The script supports both Levenshtein and Jaro-Winkler algorithms with configurable thresholds. Edit the constants at the top of the file to customize.

### Aggregation Strategies

**Weighted Average** (default) - Each field contributes proportionally
```yaml
aggregation: weighted_average
# Final score = sum(field_score * weight) / sum(weights)
```

**All or Nothing** - Any failure causes overall failure
```yaml
aggregation: all_or_nothing
# Final score = 1.0 if all fields match, else 0.0
```

## Sample Data Structure

The expected invoice extraction output follows this schema (based on mock extractor output):

```typescript
interface InvoiceExtraction {
  invoice_number: string;
  invoice_date: string;
  incoterm: string | null;
  currency: string;
  net_total: number;
  gross_total: number;
  
  supplier: {
    name: string;
    address: string;
  };
  
  importer: {
    name: string;
    address: string;
  };
  
  line_items: Array<{
    description: string;
    product_code: string | null;
    quantity: number;
    unit_price: number;
    line_total: number;
    unit_type: string;
    hs_code: string;
  }>;
}
```

**Example output from mock extractor:**
```json
{
  "invoice_number": "INV-2025-001234",
  "invoice_date": "15-JAN-2025",
  "currency": "USD",
  "net_total": 1889,
  "gross_total": 1889,
  "supplier": {
    "name": "Acme - Shipping"
  },
  "importer": {
    "name": "Global Trade Co"
  },
  "line_items": [
    {
      "description": "OCEAN FREIGHT",
      "quantity": 1,
      "unit_price": 1370,
      "line_total": 1370,
      "hs_code": "853720"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Creating Your Own Eval

1. **Define ground truth** - Create expected output JSON structure
2. **Configure evaluator** - Choose match types and weights for each field
3. **Set thresholds** - Adjust tolerance/similarity based on requirements
4. **Add test cases** - Include success, partial, and failure scenarios
5. **Run and iterate** - Adjust weights/thresholds based on results

### Example: Custom Document Type

```yaml
$schema: agentv-eval-v2
description: Receipt data extraction

execution:
  evaluators:
    - name: receipt_fields
      type: field_accuracy
      fields:
        - path: total
          match: numeric_tolerance
          tolerance: 0.01
          weight: 3.0
        - path: merchant
          match: exact
          weight: 1.0
        - path: date
          match: date
          weight: 1.0

evalcases:
  - id: receipt-001
    expected_messages:
      - role: assistant
        content:
          merchant: "Acme Store"
          date: "2026-01-02"
          total: 42.99
    input_messages:
      - role: user
        content:
          - type: file
            value: ./fixtures/receipt-001.pdf
          - type: text
            value: "Extract structured data from this receipt"
```

## Best Practices

### Field Accuracy Configuration
1. **Weight critical fields higher** - Total amounts, IDs, dates should have weight >1.0
2. **Use code_judge for fuzzy text matching** - Names and addresses with OCR variations benefit from `fuzzy_match.ts`
3. **Set realistic tolerances** - Base on observed accuracy (e.g., ±$1 for invoice totals)
4. **Mark optional fields** - `required: false` for non-critical data
5. **Test edge cases** - Include corrupted, partial, and malformed documents
6. **Start strict, relax gradually** - Begin with exact matching, add tolerance as needed

### Multi-Objective Evaluation
While the example focuses on correctness, AgentV's goals include multi-objective scoring:
- **Correctness**: Field accuracy, rubric satisfaction
- **Latency**: Extraction time per document (planned)
- **Cost**: Token usage, API costs (planned)
- **Safety**: PII handling, data sanitization (planned)

Use weighted aggregation across objectives for holistic evaluation.

### Choosing Evaluator Types
- **`field_accuracy`** (proposed): Best for structured extraction with known schema
- **`rubric`** (available now): Best for qualitative assessment with human-readable criteria
- **`code_judge`** (available now): Best for complex validation logic or custom metrics
- **Combine multiple**: Use `field_accuracy` for structure + `rubric` for quality

## Performance Benchmarks

Field accuracy evaluation targets:
- **Per-field comparison**: <10ms
- **100 fields**: ~1 second total
- **Typical invoice (20 fields)**: ~200ms

## Troubleshooting

**Low scores despite correct extraction:**
- Check field path syntax (use dot notation: `invoice.vendor.name`)
- Verify data types match (string "100" ≠ number 100)
- For text with variations, use `fuzzy_match.ts` code_judge instead of exact match

**All fields score 0.0:**
- Confirm candidate output structure matches expected schema
- Check for null/undefined values in extracted data
- Verify evaluator type is `field_accuracy` (not `llm_judge`)

**Numeric tolerance not working:**
- Ensure `relative: false` for absolute tolerance
- Check tolerance value (0.01 = ±1 cent, not ±1%)
- Verify both values are numbers (not strings)

## Related Examples

- [Geometric Evaluators (code_judge)](../../../openspec/changes/add-structured-data-evaluators/specs/geometric-evaluators/spec.md) - IoU and coordinate distance as Python scripts
- `../showcase/export-screening/` - Complex multi-evaluator example
- `../showcase/psychotherapy/` - Multi-turn conversation evaluation
