docs/vision/README.md, before:

# AgentEvo

AgentEvo continuously improves (or simply evaluates) AI agent prompts and context. It supports:

- **External Mode**: AgentEvo provides a versioned prompt artifact to an external agent (e.g. Copilot, Claude Code, proprietary agent) and invokes it.
- **Internal Mode**: AgentEvo uses its built-in lightweight multi-step executor and registered local tools.
- **Evaluation-Only**: Run scoring against a YAML panel without automatic optimization (manual human iteration supported).

Both modes work locally via CLI or HTTP API.

## Core Features
- Versioned prompt/context artifact (single JSON file).
- YAML evaluation panel (tasks, expected outputs, metric targets).
- Multi-objective scoring (correctness, latency, cost, tool efficiency, robustness, optional safety).
- Candidate generation → safe promotion → instant rollback (when optimization is desired).
- Local tool registry (CLI/API wrappers) for Internal Mode.
- Pluggable adapters for external agents.
- Evaluation-only workflow for manual prompt editing.

## Modes

| Mode | Who Executes Steps & Tools | Invocation Flag | Typical Use |
|------|----------------------------|-----------------|-------------|
| External | External agent (API/CLI/SDK) | `--mode external` | Integrate with existing platform |
| Internal | AgentEvo built-in executor | `--mode internal` | Local dev / offline evaluation |
| Eval-only | External or internal (no optimization) | `eval` command | Manual iteration / benchmarking |

Invoke via:
- CLI: `agentevo run --mode internal ...`
- API: `POST /v1/run` with JSON body including `"mode":"external"`

## Quick Start
```bash
npm i -g agentevo
agentevo init
agentevo run --mode internal --task "Summarize vector databases"
agentevo optimize --artifact ./artifacts/current.json --panel ./eval/panel.yaml
agentevo promote --candidate ./artifacts/candidate.json
```

## Evaluation-Only Examples
```bash
# Internal execution of all panel tasks
agentevo eval --mode internal \
  --artifact ./artifacts/current.json \
  --panel ./eval/panel.yaml \
  --report ./reports/eval-v13.json

# External agent execution
agentevo eval --mode external \
  --agent-type claude-code \
  --agent-endpoint http://localhost:5000 \
  --artifact ./artifacts/current.json \
  --panel ./eval/panel.yaml \
  --report ./reports/eval-v13-external.json

# Diff two evaluation reports
agentevo diff report ./reports/eval-v13.json ./reports/manual-edit-v13a.json
```

## Minimal Prompt Artifact
```json
{
  "version": "v13",
  "system": { "text": "You are a research assistant. Follow safety and efficiency rules." },
  "planner": { "text": "Task: {{task}}\\nProduce 3-6 atomic steps." },
  "tool_caller": { "text": "Step: {{step}}\\nSelect ONE tool JSON {\"tool\":...,\"args\":...,\"rationale\":\"<40w\"}" },
  "summarizer": { "text": "Steps:\\n{{steps}}\\nSummarize in <=180 words with sources [n]." },
  "bullets": {
    "safety": ["Never expose PII"],
    "efficiency": ["Avoid duplicate search queries", "Retry a failing tool at most 2 times"]
  },
  "model_config": { "temperature": 0.2 },
  "hash": "sha256:abc123"
}
```

## YAML Evaluation Panel (Example)
```yaml
tasks:
  - id: t1
    task: "Explain embeddings"
    expected: "High-level overview with dimensions & cosine similarity"
    metrics:
      correctness: exact
      latency_target_ms: 1500
      max_tool_calls: 5
  - id: t2
    task: "List 3 recent LLM efficiency papers"
    expected: "Three titles + year"
    metrics:
      correctness: semantic
      sources_required: 3
scoring:
  weights:
    correctness: 0.45
    toolEfficiency: 0.15
    robustness: 0.15
    cost: 0.15
    latency: 0.10
thresholds:
  promote_min_improvement: 0.02
  correctness_min: 0.85
```

## Optimization Loop
1. Execute tasks (external or internal).
2. Collect traces tagged with `artifact_version`.
3. Score tasks on panel.
4. Generate candidate (prompt mutations, bullet adjustments, temperature tweaks).
5. Re-score; promote if thresholds met.
6. Rollback on regression.

## Evaluation-Only Loop (Manual)
1. `agentevo eval` baseline.
2. Manually edit `current.json`.
3. Re-run `agentevo eval`.
4. Compare with `agentevo diff report`.
5. If human-approved improvement → copy / tag version, optionally `agentevo promote`.

## CLI Commands
| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `agentevo init` | Scaffold artifact & panel |
| `agentevo run` | Execute a task (internal/external) |
| `agentevo eval` | Score panel tasks without optimization |
| `agentevo optimize` | Generate candidate artifact |
| `agentevo promote` | Make candidate current |
| `agentevo rollback` | Revert to prior version |
| `agentevo tool add` | Register local tool |
| `agentevo panel validate` | Validate YAML panel |
| `agentevo diff report` | Compare evaluation reports |

## Local Tools
Register:
```bash
agentevo tool add --name search --cmd "python scripts/search.py --query '{{input}}'"
```
Use:
```bash
agentevo run --mode internal --task "Find recent RAG benchmarks"
```

## API (Local)
| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/v1/run` | POST | Execute a task (internal/external) |
| `/v1/eval` | POST | Evaluation-only execution |
| `/v1/artifact/current` | GET | Fetch active artifact |
| `/v1/optimize` | POST | Trigger optimization cycle |
| `/v1/rollback` | POST | Revert artifact version |

## Metrics (Defaults)
- correctness
- latency
- cost
- toolEfficiency
- robustness

Composite:
```
Score = 0.45*correctness + 0.15*toolEfficiency + 0.15*robustness + 0.15*cost + 0.10*latency
```

## Safety Gates (Promotion)
Blocked if:
- Correctness < threshold
- Safety violation
- Cost increase > 15%
- Latency P95 > cap

## Rollback
```bash
agentevo rollback --to v12
```

## Exit Codes
| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 0 | Success |
| 10 | No improvement |
| 20 | Safety regression |
| 30 | Invalid artifact/panel |
| 40 | Trace ingestion failure |
| 50 | Hash / integrity error |

## Structured Logging
```
{"ts":"...","artifact":"v13","stage":"planner","latency_ms":122}
{"ts":"...","artifact":"v13","stage":"tool","tool":"search","latency_ms":410}
{"ts":"...","artifact":"v13","final":{"correctness":0.9,"score":0.86}}
```

## FAQ
- **Can I just evaluate?** Yes - use `agentevo eval`.
- **Do I need external infra?** No - Internal Mode runs locally.
- **Can I use my existing agent?** Yes - External Mode supplies the prompt artifact.
- **Manual tuning?** Edit artifact → `agentevo eval` → `diff report` → promote manually.

Commit message:

Refine evaluation dataset schema: BbEval-compatible YAML with input/expected split, JSON validation, and multi-checkpoint support

docs/vision/README.md, after:

# AgentEvo

AgentEvo continuously improves (or simply evaluates) AI agent prompts and context. It supports:

- **External Mode**: AgentEvo provides a versioned prompt artifact to an external agent (e.g. Copilot, Claude Code, proprietary agent) and invokes it.
- **Internal Mode**: AgentEvo uses its built-in lightweight multi-step executor and registered local tools.
- **Evaluation-Only**: Run scoring against a YAML panel without automatic optimization (manual human iteration supported).

Both modes work locally via CLI or HTTP API.

## Core Features
- Versioned prompt/context artifact (single JSON file).
- YAML evaluation panel (tasks, expected outputs, metric targets).
- Multi-objective scoring (correctness, latency, cost, tool efficiency, robustness, optional safety).
- Candidate generation → safe promotion → instant rollback (when optimization is desired).
- Local tool registry (CLI/API wrappers) for Internal Mode.
- Pluggable adapters for external agents.
- Evaluation-only workflow for manual prompt editing.

## Modes

| Mode | Who Executes Steps & Tools | Invocation Flag | Typical Use |
|------|----------------------------|-----------------|-------------|
| External | External agent (API/CLI/SDK) | `--mode external` | Integrate with existing platform |
| Internal | AgentEvo built-in executor | `--mode internal` | Local dev / offline evaluation |
| Eval-only | External or internal (no optimization) | `eval` command | Manual iteration / benchmarking |

Invoke via:
- CLI: `agentevo run --mode internal ...`
- API: `POST /v1/run` with JSON body including `"mode":"external"`

## Quick Start
```bash
npm i -g agentevo
agentevo init
agentevo run --mode internal --task "Summarize vector databases"
agentevo optimize --artifact ./artifacts/current.json --panel ./eval/panel.yaml
agentevo promote --candidate ./artifacts/candidate.json
```

## Evaluation-Only Examples
```bash
# Internal execution of all panel tasks
agentevo eval --mode internal \
  --artifact ./artifacts/current.json \
  --panel ./eval/panel.yaml \
  --report ./reports/eval-v13.json

# External agent execution
agentevo eval --mode external \
  --agent-type claude-code \
  --agent-endpoint http://localhost:5000 \
  --artifact ./artifacts/current.json \
  --panel ./eval/panel.yaml \
  --report ./reports/eval-v13-external.json

# Diff two evaluation reports
agentevo diff report ./reports/eval-v13.json ./reports/manual-edit-v13a.json
```

## Minimal Prompt Artifact
```json
{
  "version": "v13",
  "system": { "text": "You are a research assistant. Follow safety and efficiency rules." },
  "planner": { "text": "Task: {{task}}\\nProduce 3-6 atomic steps." },
  "tool_caller": { "text": "Step: {{step}}\\nSelect ONE tool JSON {\"tool\":...,\"args\":...,\"rationale\":\"<40w\"}" },
  "summarizer": { "text": "Steps:\\n{{steps}}\\nSummarize in <=180 words with sources [n]." },
  "bullets": {
    "safety": ["Never expose PII"],
    "efficiency": ["Avoid duplicate search queries", "Retry a failing tool at most 2 times"]
  },
  "model_config": { "temperature": 0.2 },
  "hash": "sha256:abc123"
}
```

## YAML Evaluation Panel (Example)
```yaml
tasks:
  - id: t1
    task: "Explain embeddings"
    expected: "High-level overview with dimensions & cosine similarity"
    metrics:
      correctness: exact
      latency_target_ms: 1500
      max_tool_calls: 5
  - id: t2
    task: "List 3 recent LLM efficiency papers"
    expected: "Three titles + year"
    metrics:
      correctness: semantic
      sources_required: 3
scoring:
  weights:
    correctness: 0.45
    toolEfficiency: 0.15
    robustness: 0.15
    cost: 0.15
    latency: 0.10
thresholds:
  promote_min_improvement: 0.02
  correctness_min: 0.85
```

## Single-Case Dataset YAML
- When you only need one or two handcrafted eval cases, reuse BbEval's low-barrier schema instead of inventing bespoke fields. `docs/vision/example/datasets/sql_generation_single.yaml` shows a single `evalcases` entry whose `messages` transcript already contains the canonical assistant reply while `expected` holds the success `outcome` text plus rubric aspects.
- Wire the file into your panel by pointing to it with `source.type: yaml` and selecting the `bbeval_evalcases` parser (planned loader below):

```yaml
datasets:
  - id: incident-triage
    source:
      type: yaml
      path: ./datasets/sql_generation_single.yaml
    parser:
      type: bbeval_evalcases
      inputMessagesField: input.messages
      expectedMessagesField: expected.messages
      outcomeField: expected.outcome
      rubricField: expected.outcome.rubric.aspects
```
- The loader should flatten each testcase into a synthetic row so downstream tasks can bind `${dataset.input.messages}` for prompts and `${dataset.expected.messages}` / `${dataset.expected.rubric}` for scoring without special handling.
    - Keep the `evalcases` array even when a file holds just one entry; it keeps the schema uniform and makes it trivial to append additional scenarios later without rewriting tooling.
    - Group agent-facing turns under `input.messages` and keep gold responses under `expected.messages` so pipelines can cleanly separate prompts from ground truth.
    - Optional per-case execution overrides such as `target` or `grader` can live under `execution.*` when panels need per-task tweaks.
    - For backward compatibility, treat `expected.outcome` as either a bare string (description only) or an object with `description`/`rubric` children; the parser can normalize the string case to `{ description: <value> }` before evaluation.
- The JSON Schema at `docs/vision/eval-schema.json` formalizes the structure above so authors and tools can validate cases consistently.
    - Use `checkpoint` or `conversationId` on an evalcase when you want to group multiple scoring waypoints from the same dialogue.
    - Message roles default to `system|user|assistant|tool`, but custom roles are allowed if they follow `[A-Za-z0-9_-]+`. Likewise, content parts support common types (`text`, `file`, `tool_call`, etc.) while staying extensible.
- Aligning with BbEval keeps the authoring surface consistent across projects and lets us share example libraries (WTG.AI.Prompts already publishes dozens of complex scenarios in this shape).

## Optimization Loop
1. Execute tasks (external or internal).
2. Collect traces tagged with `artifact_version`.
3. Score tasks on panel.
4. Generate candidate (prompt mutations, bullet adjustments, temperature tweaks).
5. Re-score; promote if thresholds met.
6. Rollback on regression.

## Evaluation-Only Loop (Manual)
1. `agentevo eval` baseline.
2. Manually edit `current.json`.
3. Re-run `agentevo eval`.
4. Compare with `agentevo diff report`.
5. If human-approved improvement → copy / tag version, optionally `agentevo promote`.

## CLI Commands
| Command | Purpose |
|---------|---------|
| `agentevo init` | Scaffold artifact & panel |
| `agentevo run` | Execute a task (internal/external) |
| `agentevo eval` | Score panel tasks without optimization |
| `agentevo optimize` | Generate candidate artifact |
| `agentevo promote` | Make candidate current |
| `agentevo rollback` | Revert to prior version |
| `agentevo tool add` | Register local tool |
| `agentevo panel validate` | Validate YAML panel |
| `agentevo diff report` | Compare evaluation reports |

## Local Tools
Register:
```bash
agentevo tool add --name search --cmd "python scripts/search.py --query '{{input}}'"
```
Use:
```bash
agentevo run --mode internal --task "Find recent RAG benchmarks"
```

## API (Local)
| Endpoint | Method | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `/v1/run` | POST | Execute a task (internal/external) |
| `/v1/eval` | POST | Evaluation-only execution |
| `/v1/artifact/current` | GET | Fetch active artifact |
| `/v1/optimize` | POST | Trigger optimization cycle |
| `/v1/rollback` | POST | Revert artifact version |

## Metrics (Defaults)
- correctness
- latency
- cost
- toolEfficiency
- robustness

Composite:
```
Score = 0.45*correctness + 0.15*toolEfficiency + 0.15*robustness + 0.15*cost + 0.10*latency
```

## Safety Gates (Promotion)
Blocked if:
- Correctness < threshold
- Safety violation
- Cost increase > 15%
- Latency P95 > cap

## Rollback
```bash
agentevo rollback --to v12
```

## Exit Codes
| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| 0 | Success |
| 10 | No improvement |
| 20 | Safety regression |
| 30 | Invalid artifact/panel |
| 40 | Trace ingestion failure |
| 50 | Hash / integrity error |

## Structured Logging
```
{"ts":"...","artifact":"v13","stage":"planner","latency_ms":122}
{"ts":"...","artifact":"v13","stage":"tool","tool":"search","latency_ms":410}
{"ts":"...","artifact":"v13","final":{"correctness":0.9,"score":0.86}}
```

## FAQ
- **Can I just evaluate?** Yes - use `agentevo eval`.
- **Do I need external infra?** No - Internal Mode runs locally.
- **Can I use my existing agent?** Yes - External Mode supplies the prompt artifact.
- **Manual tuning?** Edit artifact → `agentevo eval` → `diff report` → promote manually.
