examples/features/batch-cli/README.md, before:

# Batch CLI example (AML screening, CSV → JSONL)

This example demonstrates an **external batch runner** pattern for a (synthetic) AML screening use-case:

1. AgentV eval cases use `input_messages` with **structured (object) content** containing multiple fields.
2. Expected outputs live in `expected_messages` (schema-aligned), e.g. `content.decision`.
3. A helper script converts those `input_messages` into a CSV file (`AmlScreeningInput.csv`).
4. A batch CLI tool reads the CSV once and writes a JSONL file containing one record per eval case.
5. The batch runner outputs `output_messages` with `tool_calls` in the JSONL, enabling `tool_trajectory` evaluation directly from the message format.

Important: the CSV intentionally does **not** include the expected decision to avoid leaking answers to the provider.

## Tool Trajectory via output_messages

The batch runner outputs JSONL records with `output_messages` containing `tool_calls`:

```json
{
  "id": "aml-001",
  "text": "{...}",
  "output_messages": [
    {
      "role": "assistant",
      "tool_calls": [
        {
          "tool": "aml_screening",
          "input": { "origin_country": "NZ", ... },
          "output": { "decision": "CLEAR", ... }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

The `tool_trajectory` evaluator extracts tool calls directly from `output_messages[].tool_calls[]`. This is the primary format - no separate `trace` field is required.

## Files

- `batch-cli-demo.yaml` — Eval cases with multi-field `input_messages`
- `scripts/build-csv-from-eval.ts` — Converts eval YAML → `AmlScreeningInput.csv`
- `scripts/batch-cli-runner.ts` — Reads CSV → writes JSONL (also copies to `agentv-evalresult.jsonl`)
- `.agentv/targets.yaml` — Defines the `batch_cli` CLI target with provider batching enabled

## Run

From the repo root:

```bash
cd examples/features/evals/batch-cli

# Run AgentV against the batch CLI target
# NOTE: This requires the CLI provider to support batching + JSONL batch output.
bun agentv eval ./batch-cli-demo.yaml --target batch_cli
```

Optional (manual CSV build):

```bash
bun run ./scripts/build-csv-from-eval.ts --eval ./batch-cli-demo.yaml --out ./AmlScreeningInput.csv
```

After running:
- The batch runner will write a copy of the produced records to `agentv-evalresult.jsonl` in this directory.

Commit message:

refactor: improve batch CLI evaluator error handling and examples (#115)
* refactor batch-cli-runner

* refactor batch-cli example and add not-exist example

* fix: handle missing batch IDs gracefully in CLI provider

When a batch CLI output is missing an eval case ID, return an error
response for that specific case instead of throwing an error that
breaks the entire batch. This allows other eval cases with matching
IDs to be evaluated correctly.

Previously, a missing ID would cause the batch to fail and fall back
to per-case execution, which incorrectly used all JSONL records as
the candidate for every eval case.

* improve error handling in batch-cli

* changeset

* version

examples/features/batch-cli/README.md, after:

# Batch CLI example (AML screening, CSV → JSONL)

This example demonstrates an **external batch runner** pattern for a (synthetic) AML screening use-case.

## How it works

1. **Ground truth**: `evals/dataset.yaml` contains eval cases with `input_messages` (structured object content) and `expected_messages` (e.g., `content.decision`).

2. **CSV conversion**: `batch-cli-runner.ts` imports functions from `build-csv-from-eval.ts` to convert `input_messages` into CSV format. The CSV contains only inputs (customer data, transaction details) - no expected decisions.

3. **Batch processing**: `batch-cli-runner.ts` reads the CSV and applies synthetic AML screening rules, writing **actual responses** as JSONL to a temporary file. Each JSONL record includes `output_messages` with `tool_calls` for trace extraction.

4. **Evaluation**: AgentV compares the actual JSONL output against the ground truth in `evals/dataset.yaml` using evaluators like `code_judge` and `tool_trajectory`.

## Batch error handling (missing JSONL id)

This example intentionally includes an eval case (`aml-004-not-exist`) that is **not written into the CSV input** by `scripts/build-csv-from-eval.ts`.

That means the batch runner never emits a JSONL record for that `eval_id`, and the CLI provider surfaces a provider-side error:

- `error: "Batch output missing id 'aml-004-not-exist'"`

AgentV then reports that eval case as failed (with `error` populated), while still evaluating the other items in the batch.

## Tool Trajectory via output_messages

The batch runner outputs JSONL records with `output_messages` containing `tool_calls`:

```json
{
  "id": "aml-001",
  "text": "{...}",
  "output_messages": [
    {
      "role": "assistant",
      "tool_calls": [
        {
          "tool": "aml_screening",
          "input": { "origin_country": "NZ", ... },
          "output": { "decision": "CLEAR", ... }
        }
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

The `tool_trajectory` evaluator extracts tool calls directly from `output_messages[].tool_calls[]`. This is the primary format - no separate `trace` field is required.

## Files

- `batch-cli-demo.yaml` — Ground truth: eval cases with inputs and expected outputs
- `scripts/build-csv-from-eval.ts` — Utilities to convert YAML eval cases to CSV format (imported by batch-cli-runner.ts)
- `scripts/batch-cli-runner.ts` — Main batch runner: converts inputs to CSV, processes them, writes actual responses as JSONL
- `.agentv/targets.yaml` — Defines the `batch_cli` CLI target with provider batching enabled

## Run

From the repo root:

```bash
cd examples/features/batch-cli

# Run AgentV against the batch CLI target
# NOTE: This requires the CLI provider to support batching + JSONL batch output.
bun agentv eval ./evals/dataset.yaml --target batch_cli
```
