apps/web/src/content/docs/evaluation/eval-cases.mdx, before:

---
title: Tests
description: Defining individual tests
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

Tests are individual test entries within an evaluation file. Each test defines input messages, expected outcomes, and optional evaluator overrides.

## Basic Structure

```yaml
tests:
  - id: addition
    criteria: Correctly calculates 15 + 27 = 42

    input: What is 15 + 27?

    expected_output: "42"
```

## Fields

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `id` | Yes | Unique identifier for the test |
| `criteria` | Yes | Description of what a correct response should contain |
| `input` | Yes | Input sent to the target (string, object, or message array). Alias: `input` |
| `expected_output` | No | Expected response for comparison (string, object, or message array). Alias: `expected_output` |
| `execution` | No | Per-case execution overrides (target, evaluators) |
| `workspace` | No | Per-case workspace config (overrides suite-level) |
| `metadata` | No | Arbitrary key-value pairs passed to setup/teardown scripts |
| `rubrics` | No | Structured evaluation criteria |
| `assert` | No | Per-test assertion evaluators (alternative to `execution.evaluators`) |
| `sidecar` | No | Additional metadata passed to evaluators |

## Input

The simplest form is a string, which expands to a single user message:

```yaml
input: What is 15 + 27?
```

For multi-turn or system messages, use a message array:

```yaml
input:
  - role: system
    content: You are a helpful math tutor.
  - role: user
    content: What is 15 + 27?
```

## Expected Output

Optional reference response for comparison by evaluators. A string expands to a single assistant message:

```yaml
expected_output: "42"
```

For structured or multi-message expected output, use a message array:

```yaml
expected_output:
  - role: assistant
    content: "42"
```

## Per-Case Execution Overrides

Override the default target or evaluators for specific tests:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: complex-case
    criteria: Provides detailed explanation
    input: Explain quicksort algorithm

    execution:
      target: gpt4_target
      evaluators:
        - name: depth_check
          type: llm_judge
          prompt: ./judges/depth.md
```

Per-case evaluators are **merged** with root-level `execution.evaluators` — test-specific evaluators run first, then root-level defaults are appended. To opt out of root-level evaluators for a specific test, set `skip_defaults: true`:

```yaml
execution:
  evaluators:
    - name: latency_check
      type: latency
      threshold: 5000

tests:
  - id: normal-case
    criteria: Returns correct answer
    input: What is 2+2?
    # Gets latency_check from root-level evaluators

  - id: special-case
    criteria: Handles edge case
    input: Handle this edge case
    execution:
      skip_defaults: true
      evaluators:
        - name: custom_eval
          type: llm_judge
      # Does NOT get latency_check
```

## Per-Case Workspace Config

Override the suite-level workspace config for individual tests. Test-level fields replace suite-level fields:

```yaml
workspace:
  setup:
    script: ["bun", "run", "default-setup.ts"]

tests:
  - id: case-1
    criteria: Should work
    input: Do something
    workspace:
      setup:
        script: ["bun", "run", "custom-setup.ts"]

  - id: case-2
    criteria: Should also work
    input: Do something else
    # Inherits suite-level setup
```

See [Workspace Setup/Teardown](/targets/configuration/#workspace-setupteardown) for the full workspace config reference.

## Per-Case Metadata

Pass arbitrary key-value pairs to setup/teardown scripts via the `metadata` field. This is useful for benchmark datasets where each case needs repo info, commit hashes, or other context:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: sympy-20590
    criteria: Bug should be fixed
    input: Fix the diophantine equation bug
    metadata:
      repo: sympy/sympy
      base_commit: "abc123def"
    workspace:
      setup:
        script: ["python", "checkout_repo.py"]
```

The `metadata` field is included in the stdin JSON passed to setup and teardown scripts as `case_metadata`.

## Per-Test Assertions

The `assert` field provides a concise way to attach evaluators directly to a test, as an alternative to nesting them inside `execution.evaluators`. It supports both deterministic assertion types and LLM-based rubric evaluation.

### Deterministic Assertions

These evaluators run without an LLM call and produce binary (0 or 1) scores:

| Type | Field | Description |
|------|-------|-------------|
| `contains` | `value` | Checks if output contains the substring |
| `regex` | `value` | Checks if output matches the regex pattern |
| `is_json` | — | Checks if output is valid JSON |
| `equals` | `value` | Checks if output exactly equals the value (trimmed) |

```yaml
tests:
  - id: json-api
    criteria: Returns valid JSON with status field
    input: Return the system status as JSON
    assert:
      - type: is_json
      - type: contains
        value: '"status"'
```

Assertion evaluators auto-generate a `name` when one is not provided (e.g., `contains-DENIED`, `is_json`).

### Rubric Assertions

Use `type: rubrics` with a `criteria` array to define structured LLM-judged evaluation criteria inline:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: denied-party
    criteria: Must identify denied party
    input:
      - role: user
        content: Screen "Acme Corp" against denied parties list
    expected_output:
      - role: assistant
        content: "DENIED"
    assert:
      - type: contains
        value: "DENIED"
        required: true
      - type: rubrics
        criteria:
          - id: accuracy
            outcome: Correctly identifies the denied party
            weight: 5.0
          - id: reasoning
            outcome: Provides clear reasoning for the decision
            weight: 3.0
```

### Required Gates

Any evaluator (in `assert` or `execution.evaluators`) can be marked as `required`. When a required evaluator fails, the overall test verdict is `fail` regardless of the aggregate score.

| Value | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| `required: true` | Must score >= 0.8 (default threshold) to pass |
| `required: 0.6` | Must score >= 0.6 to pass (custom threshold between 0 and 1) |

```yaml
assert:
  - type: contains
    value: "DENIED"
    required: true          # must pass (>= 0.8)
  - type: rubrics
    required: 0.6           # must score at least 0.6
    criteria:
      - id: quality
        outcome: Response is well-structured
        weight: 1.0
```

Required gates are evaluated after all evaluators run. If any required evaluator falls below its threshold, the verdict is forced to `fail`.

### Assert vs execution.evaluators

`assert` and `execution.evaluators` serve the same purpose — both define evaluators for a test. Choose whichever fits your style:

- **`assert`**: Flat, concise syntax at the test level. Best for assertion-heavy evals.
- **`execution.evaluators`**: Nested under `execution`. Useful when you also set `target` or `skip_defaults`.

When both are present on the same test, `assert` takes precedence over `execution.evaluators`. Suite-level `assert` and `execution.evaluators` follow the same merge rules — they are appended to per-test evaluators unless `skip_defaults: true` is set.

## Sidecar Metadata

Pass additional context to evaluators via the `sidecar` field:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: code-gen
    criteria: Generates valid Python
    sidecar:
      language: python
      difficulty: medium
    input: Write a function to sort a list
```

Commit message:

fix(docs): migrate evaluator docs to assert syntax

apps/web/src/content/docs/evaluation/eval-cases.mdx, after:

---
title: Tests
description: Defining individual tests
sidebar:
  order: 2
---

Tests are individual test entries within an evaluation file. Each test defines input messages, expected outcomes, and optional evaluator overrides.

## Basic Structure

```yaml
tests:
  - id: addition
    criteria: Correctly calculates 15 + 27 = 42

    input: What is 15 + 27?

    expected_output: "42"
```

## Fields

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `id` | Yes | Unique identifier for the test |
| `criteria` | Yes | Description of what a correct response should contain |
| `input` | Yes | Input sent to the target (string, object, or message array). Alias: `input` |
| `expected_output` | No | Expected response for comparison (string, object, or message array). Alias: `expected_output` |
| `execution` | No | Per-case execution overrides (for example `target`, `skip_defaults`) |
| `workspace` | No | Per-case workspace config (overrides suite-level) |
| `metadata` | No | Arbitrary key-value pairs passed to setup/teardown scripts |
| `rubrics` | No | Structured evaluation criteria |
| `assert` | No | Per-test evaluators |
| `sidecar` | No | Additional metadata passed to evaluators |

## Input

The simplest form is a string, which expands to a single user message:

```yaml
input: What is 15 + 27?
```

For multi-turn or system messages, use a message array:

```yaml
input:
  - role: system
    content: You are a helpful math tutor.
  - role: user
    content: What is 15 + 27?
```

## Expected Output

Optional reference response for comparison by evaluators. A string expands to a single assistant message:

```yaml
expected_output: "42"
```

For structured or multi-message expected output, use a message array:

```yaml
expected_output:
  - role: assistant
    content: "42"
```

## Per-Case Execution Overrides

Override the default target or evaluators for specific tests:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: complex-case
    criteria: Provides detailed explanation
    input: Explain quicksort algorithm

    execution:
      target: gpt4_target
    assert:
      - name: depth_check
        type: llm_judge
        prompt: ./judges/depth.md
```

Per-case `assert` evaluators are **merged** with root-level `assert` evaluators — test-specific evaluators run first, then root-level defaults are appended. To opt out of root-level defaults for a specific test, set `execution.skip_defaults: true`:

```yaml
assert:
  - name: latency_check
    type: latency
    threshold: 5000

tests:
  - id: normal-case
    criteria: Returns correct answer
    input: What is 2+2?
    # Gets latency_check from root-level assert

  - id: special-case
    criteria: Handles edge case
    input: Handle this edge case
    execution:
      skip_defaults: true
    assert:
      - name: custom_eval
        type: llm_judge
    # Does NOT get latency_check
```

## Per-Case Workspace Config

Override the suite-level workspace config for individual tests. Test-level fields replace suite-level fields:

```yaml
workspace:
  setup:
    script: ["bun", "run", "default-setup.ts"]

tests:
  - id: case-1
    criteria: Should work
    input: Do something
    workspace:
      setup:
        script: ["bun", "run", "custom-setup.ts"]

  - id: case-2
    criteria: Should also work
    input: Do something else
    # Inherits suite-level setup
```

See [Workspace Setup/Teardown](/targets/configuration/#workspace-setupteardown) for the full workspace config reference.

## Per-Case Metadata

Pass arbitrary key-value pairs to setup/teardown scripts via the `metadata` field. This is useful for benchmark datasets where each case needs repo info, commit hashes, or other context:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: sympy-20590
    criteria: Bug should be fixed
    input: Fix the diophantine equation bug
    metadata:
      repo: sympy/sympy
      base_commit: "abc123def"
    workspace:
      setup:
        script: ["python", "checkout_repo.py"]
```

The `metadata` field is included in the stdin JSON passed to setup and teardown scripts as `case_metadata`.

## Per-Test Assertions

The `assert` field defines evaluators directly on a test. It supports both deterministic assertion types and LLM-based rubric evaluation.

### Deterministic Assertions

These evaluators run without an LLM call and produce binary (0 or 1) scores:

| Type | Field | Description |
|------|-------|-------------|
| `contains` | `value` | Checks if output contains the substring |
| `regex` | `value` | Checks if output matches the regex pattern |
| `is_json` | — | Checks if output is valid JSON |
| `equals` | `value` | Checks if output exactly equals the value (trimmed) |

```yaml
tests:
  - id: json-api
    criteria: Returns valid JSON with status field
    input: Return the system status as JSON
    assert:
      - type: is_json
      - type: contains
        value: '"status"'
```

Assertion evaluators auto-generate a `name` when one is not provided (e.g., `contains-DENIED`, `is_json`).

### Rubric Assertions

Use `type: rubrics` with a `criteria` array to define structured LLM-judged evaluation criteria inline:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: denied-party
    criteria: Must identify denied party
    input:
      - role: user
        content: Screen "Acme Corp" against denied parties list
    expected_output:
      - role: assistant
        content: "DENIED"
    assert:
      - type: contains
        value: "DENIED"
        required: true
      - type: rubrics
        criteria:
          - id: accuracy
            outcome: Correctly identifies the denied party
            weight: 5.0
          - id: reasoning
            outcome: Provides clear reasoning for the decision
            weight: 3.0
```

### Required Gates

Any evaluator in `assert` can be marked as `required`. When a required evaluator fails, the overall test verdict is `fail` regardless of the aggregate score.

| Value | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| `required: true` | Must score >= 0.8 (default threshold) to pass |
| `required: 0.6` | Must score >= 0.6 to pass (custom threshold between 0 and 1) |

```yaml
assert:
  - type: contains
    value: "DENIED"
    required: true          # must pass (>= 0.8)
  - type: rubrics
    required: 0.6           # must score at least 0.6
    criteria:
      - id: quality
        outcome: Response is well-structured
        weight: 1.0
```

Required gates are evaluated after all evaluators run. If any required evaluator falls below its threshold, the verdict is forced to `fail`.

### Assert Merge Behavior

`assert` can be defined at both suite and test levels:

- Per-test `assert` evaluators run first.
- Suite-level `assert` evaluators are appended automatically.
- Set `execution.skip_defaults: true` on a test to skip suite-level defaults.

## Sidecar Metadata

Pass additional context to evaluators via the `sidecar` field:

```yaml
tests:
  - id: code-gen
    criteria: Generates valid Python
    sidecar:
      language: python
      difficulty: medium
    input: Write a function to sort a list
```
